# Understanding plain weave 

Our initial attempt at reaching an understanding of the complexities
 of weaving predated the WeavingCodes project and took
 place during the Mathematickal arts workshop
 [http://fo.am/mathematickal_arts/] at Foam Brussels in 2011. This
 workshop, with Tim Boykett and textile designer and educator Carole
 Collet was devoted to bringing together the arts of mathematics,
 textiles and computer programming.

Plain or tabby weave is the simplest form of weaving, but when
combined with sequences of colour it can produce many different types
of pattern. For example, some of these patterns when combined with
muted colours, have in the past been used as a type of camouflage â€“
and are classified into District Checks for use in hunting in Lowland
Scotland.

It only takes a few lines of code to calculate and print the colours
of an arbitrarily sized plain weave, by using lists of warp and weft
yarn as input.

    ;; return warp or weft, dependant on the position
    (define (stitch x y warp weft)
      ;; a simple way to describe a 2x2 plain weave kernel
      (if (eq? (modulo x 2)
               (modulo y 2))
      warp weft))

    ;; prints out a weaving, picking warp or weft depending on the position
    (define (weave warp weft)
      (for ((x (in-range 0 (length weft))))
         (for ((y (in-range 0 (length warp))))
            (display (stitch x y 
                             (list-ref warp y)
                             (list-ref weft x))))
       (newline)))

For simplicity we initially visualised the weaves with single
characters representing colours for previewing in text form, here are
some examples:

Warp and weft all the same colour:

`(weave '(O O O O O O O) '(: : : : : : : : :))`

     O : O : O : O
     : O : O : O :
     O : O : O : O
     : O : O : O :
     O : O : O : O
     : O : O : O :
     O : O : O : O
     : O : O : O :
     O : O : O : O

2:2 alternating colour with an offset:

`(weave '(O O : : O O : : O O) '(O : : O O : : O O :))`

     : O : : : O : : : O
     O : : : O : : : O :
     O O O : O O O : O O
     O O : O O O : O O O
     : O : : : O : : : O
     O : : : O : : : O :
     O O O : O O O : O O
     O O : O O O : O O O
     : O : : : O : : : O

We also wanted to look into ways of generating new patterns
algorithmically, using formal grammars. These techniques were
originally used to model plan or cellular growth. The idea is that you
begin with an axiom, or starting state, and do a 'search replace' on
it repeatedly following one or more simple rules:

    Axiom: O
    Rule 1: O => O : O :
    Rule 2: : => : O :

So we begin with the axiom:

    O

Then run rule one on it - replacing `O` with `O : O :`

    O : O :

Then run rule two, replacing `:` with `: O :`:

    O : O : O : O :

And repeat both these steps one more time:

    O : O : O : O : : O : O : O : O : O : : O : O : O : O : O : : O : O : O : O : O : : O :

This technique allows us to use a very small representation that
expands into a long complex form - however our simple text
representation doesn't really indicate how the weave translates into a
textile, so the next step is to try weaving these patterns.

We run the rules one more time, then read off the pattern replacing
`O` for red and `:` as orange to warp a frame loom:

![](figures/IMAG0376.jpg)

When weaving, we follow the same sequence for the weft threads:

![](figures/IMAG0378-2.jpg)

The idea of this approach was twofold, firstly to begin to understand
weaving by modelling plain weave, and confirming a hypothesis (the
text version of the pattern) by following instructions produced by the
language by actually weaving them.

The other aspect was to use a generative formal grammar to explore the
patterns possible given the restriction of plain weave, perhaps in a
different manner to that used by weavers - but one that starts to treat
weaving as a computational medium.

This system was restricted by only working with plain weave, although
given the range of patterns possible, this didn't seem too much of a
problem. What was more problematic was the abstract nature of the
symbols and text modelling, in future developments we addressed both
of these issues.
