% Textility of Code: A catalogue of errors

# Abstract



# Introduction

Through the following article, we look for different ways to represent
the structure of ancient weaves with contemporary source
code. Unusually for an article in the present journal, we approach
this topic from a position of naivete, as computer programmers rather
than textile artists. Accordingly, our aims are humble; to attempt to
simulate certain aspects of weaving in order to greater understand its
structure, and its relation to contemporary computer languages.

The title of this article is intended to recognise the difficulty of
simulating woven structure; any attempt to fully simulate cloth is in
some sense doomed to failure. The physical properties of thread at
multiple scales, the duality of warp and weft, the three dimensional
structures of ups and downs first under tension and then released, and
the continuous and discrete interactions between thread that allow a
cloth to hold together (or otherwise fall apart), and much more
besides.

Textile craftspeople have developed the technology of weaving over
millennia, often passing on knowledge through non-verbal means as
tacit knowledge. Approaching this technology as computer scientists,
we have found weaving to support a great depth of physical engagement
with the fundamental nature of computation. Indeed, it would seem that
the far younger field of computer science has a great deal to learn
from the field of textile design. We therefore approach weaving not in
order to create tools to support or even less 'solve' it, but rather
to help communicate the complexity of its structure and perhaps look
for ways in which textiles could inform the development of computer
science.

# Understanding plain weave

\label{sec:plainweave}

Most of the work presented here was conducted as part of the *Weaving
Codes, Coding Weaves* project, funded by the Arts and Humanities
Research Council between 2014 and 2016. However, our initial attempt
at reaching an understanding of the complexities of weaving took place
during the
[Mathematickal arts workshop](http://fo.am/mathematickal_arts/) at
FoAM Brussels in 2011. This workshop, with Tim Boykett and textile
designer and educator Carole Collet was devoted to bringing together
the arts of mathematics, textiles and computer programming.

Plain (or tabby) weave is the simplest woven structure, but
nonetheless, when woven with sequences of coloured warp and weft
threads can produce a great variety of pattern. It only takes a few
lines of code (shown below in the *Scheme* language) to calculate the
colours of a plain weave, using lists of warp and weft yarn as input.

\begin{lstlisting}
;; return warp or weft, dependent on the position
(define (stitch x y warp weft)
  ;; a simple way to describe a 2x2 plain weave kernel
  (if (eq? (modulo x 2)
           (modulo y 2))
  warp weft))

;; prints out a weaving, picking warp or weft depending on the
;; position
(define (weave warp weft)
  (for ((x (in-range 0 (length weft))))
     (for ((y (in-range 0 (length warp))))
        (display (stitch x y 
                         (list-ref warp y)
                         (list-ref weft x))))
   (newline)))
\end{lstlisting}

With this small computer program we may visualise the weaves with
textual symbols representing different colours. For example, to
specify distinct colours for the warp and weft threads:

\begin{lstlisting}
(weave '(O O O O O O O) '(: : : : : : : : :))

     O : O : O : O
     : O : O : O :
     O : O : O : O
     : O : O : O :
     O : O : O : O
     : O : O : O :
     O : O : O : O
     : O : O : O :
     O : O : O : O
\end{lstlisting}

The above simply shows the structure of the warp/weft crossings, with
all warps having a colour represented by `O`, and all wefts having one
represented by `:`. With slightly more complex colourings, we quickly
got a glimpse of the generative possibilities of even plain weave.
For example, 2:2 alternating colour of both warp and weft threads,
with an offset on the weft:

\begin{lstlisting}
(weave '(O O : : O O : : O O) '(O : : O O : : O O :))

     : O : : : O : : : O
     O : : : O : : : O :
     O O O : O O O : O O
     O O : O O O : O O O
     : O : : : O : : : O
     O : : : O : : : O :
     O O O : O O O : O O
     O O : O O O : O O O
     : O : : : O : : : O
\end{lstlisting}

This emergence of pattern will be familiar to an experienced weaver,
but potentially of great surprise to a computer programmer. We wanted
to explore these warp/weft thread colour patterns of plain weave
further, by generating them algorithmically. We chose Lindenmayer
systems (L-systems), which are formal grammars originally used to
model plant or cellular growth [See e.g. @Flake00]. L-systems can be
related to weaves, in that they consist of rules which may appear to
be simple, but which often generate complex results which come as a
surprise to the uninitiated. We began with a starting colour (known as
an *axiom*), and then followed two 'search-replace' operations
repeatedly, following the following simple rules:

\begin{lstlisting}
    Axiom: O
    Rule 1: O => O:O:
    Rule 2: : => :O:
\end{lstlisting}

In the above, `=>` simply means search for the symbol on the left, and
replace with the symbols on the right. So, we begin with the axiom:

\begin{lstlisting}
    O
\end{lstlisting}

Then run rule 1 on it - replacing `O` with `O:O:`

\begin{lstlisting}
    O:O:
\end{lstlisting}

Then run rule two, replacing all instances of `:` with `:O:`:

\begin{lstlisting}
    O:O:O:O:
\end{lstlisting}

And repeat both these steps one more time:

\begin{lstlisting}
    O:O:O:O::O:O:O:O:O::O:O:O:O:O::O:O:O:O:O::O:
\end{lstlisting}

This technique allows us to use a very small representation that
expands into a long, complex form. However, our simple text-based
representation does not fully represent how the weave appears and
behaves as a three-dimensional textile, so our next step was to try
weaving these patterns.

We could keep running our rules forever, the string of text will just
keep growing. However, to create a fabric of manageable size we
decided to run them just one more time, then read off the pattern
replacing `O` for red and `:` as orange to warp a frame loom, shown in
Figure \ref{lsystem-warp}. When weaving, we followed the same sequence
for the weft threads, resulting in the textile shown in Figure
\ref{lsystem-weave}.

\begin{figure}[h]
\begin{center}
  \subfloat[\label{lsystem-warp}The warped frame loom.]{\includegraphics[width=0.45\textwidth]{figures/01-warped-frame-loom.jpg}}
  \hspace{1em}\subfloat[\label{lsystem-weave}Close-up of resulting weave.]{\includegraphics[width=0.45\textwidth]{figures/02-lsystem-weave.jpg}}
  \caption{\label{lsystem-combined}Realisation of weave resulting from a pattern generated from an L-System.}
\end{center}
\end{figure}

There were two motivations behind this approach, firstly to begin to
understand weaving by modelling plain weave, and confirming a
hypothesis (the text-based version of the pattern) by following
instructions produced by the language to actually weave them. The
other aspect was to use a generative formal grammar to explore the
patterns possible given the restriction of plain weave, perhaps in a
different manner to that used by weavers -- but one that starts to
treat weaving as a computational medium.

This system was restricted by only working with plain weave. Given the
range of patterns possible, this was not of immediate concern, but
something we addressed in our later systems.

# Four shaft loom simulation

In order to engage further with the complexities of woven structure,
we needed to look beyond plain weave. Our next step was to model the
workings of a four-shaft loom. One of our core aims is to gain
knowledge about the computational processes involved in weaving, and
so we need to gain deep understanding of how a loom works. As a result,
our four-shaft loom simulation takes a different approach to that of
most weaving simulation software. In much contemporary weaving
software, you 'draw' a two-dimensional image, and the software then
generates instructions for how it may be woven.  However, our
simulation does the opposite - you describe the set up of the loom,
and the software tells you what visual patterns result. Our latter
approach brings the three-dimensional structure of a weave to the
fore, allowing us to investigate the complex interference patterns of
warp and weft, considering the visual result in close relation to the
underlying structure that it arises from.

Our model of a four-shaft loom calculates the *shed* (the gap between
ordered warp threads), processing each shaft in turn and using a
logical "OR" operation on each warp thread to calculate which ones are
picked up. This turns out to be the core of the algorithm -- a key
excerpt of which is shown below:

~~~~ {.scheme}
;; 'or's two lists together:
;; (list-or (list 0 1 1 0) (list 0 0 1 1)) => (list 0 1 1 1)
(define (list-or a b)
  (map2
   (lambda (a b)
     (if (or (not (zero? a)) (not (zero? b))) 1 0))
   a b))

;; calculate the shed, given a lift plan position counter
;; shed is 0/1 for each warp thread: up/down
(define (loom-shed l lift-counter)
  (foldl
   (lambda (a b)
     (list-or a b))
   (build-list (length (car (loom-heddles l))) (lambda (a) 0))
   (loom-heddles-raised l lift-counter)))
~~~~
   
This code embodies understanding of how the warping of a loom
corresponds to the patterns it produces, and may be quickly
experimented and played with in a way that is not possible on a
physical loom (which would require time consuming re-warping with each
change). Figure \ref{boxy} shows an example weave, with both warp and
the weft alternating between light and dark yarns.

\begin{figure}[h]
\begin{center}
\includegraphics[width=0.5\textwidth]{figures/03-boxy.png}

\caption{\label{boxy}The interface for our four shaft loom simulation, showing heddles (above), lift plan (to the right) and simulated weave.}
\end{center}
\end{figure}

As with testing our understanding of plain weave in the previous
section, our next step was to try weaving the structures with a real
loom and threads, in order to test our model. A frame loom was
constructed to weave these patterns, pictured in Figure
\ref{frame-loom}. Here the shafts are sleyed to pick up the warp as
defined by the simulation's input (the checkboxes seen in
Fig. \ref{boxy}). The threads (which form heddles) are tied on to
wooden poles which are pulled in different combinations during
weaving. This is a similar technique to that used in warp weighted
looms, and is much faster than counting threads manually each time. It
is important to construct heddles from thinner threads than the warp,
but as they are put under tension during the weaving process they do
need to be strong. Fittingly for our Weaving Codes project,
configuring the warp with heddles felt very much like coding threads,
with threads.

\begin{figure}[h]
\begin{center}
\subfloat[\label{frame-loom}Frame loom constructed to test our simulation]{\includegraphics[width=0.45\textwidth]{figures/04-frame-loom.jpg}}
  \hspace{1em}\subfloat[\label{meander}Close-ups of a simulated \emph{meander} pattern, and its actual weave (with floating threads)]{\includegraphics[width=0.45\textwidth]{figures/05-meander.jpg}}
  \caption{\label{four-shaft-loom}Testing our simulation of a four-shaft loom}
\end{center}
\end{figure}

Often, an improvised approach to weaving is called for, even when
using a predefined pattern. There is a great deal of reasoning
required to respond to issues of structure that cannot be fully
anticipated. This is because you need to respond to the interactions
between the materials and the loom itself. The clearest example is the
\emph{selvedge} or edges of the fabric, which must be thought about
and solved ‘live’ as you weave. In order to keep the weave from
falling apart you need to ‘tweak’ the first and last warp thread based
on which weft yarn colour thread you are using. The different weft
threads also need to go over/under each other in a suitable manner.

In relation to computer programming, this improvisation at the loom is
analogous to *live coding*, where code is written 'on the fly', often
as a performing art such as live music making [@Blackwell14]. See Emma
Cocker's article in the present issue of Textile for deep
investigation into the relation between between live weaving and live
coding. ** Please insert reference **

Figure \ref{meander} shows close-ups of the simulated *meander* pattern and its
actual weave. There are clear differences visible between them, due to
the behaviour of the long 'floating' threads; the pattern would be
distorted further if the fabric were removed from the loom and the
tension lost. The extent to which it is possible, or even desirable to
include such material limitations into a weaving language or model was
one of our main topics of inquiry when talking to our advisers
(particularly esteemed industrial weaver Leslie Downes). Through
discussion, we came to understand that simulating such physical
interaction between threads is beyond even the most expensive
simulation software.

We have already mentioned two aspects of weaving which do not feature
in weaving software; the structure of selvedge, and the behaviour of
floats. We also noted a third, more subtle limitation: some sequences
of sheds cause problems when packing down the weft, for example if you
are not too careful you can cause the neat ordering of the weft
colours to be disrupted in some situations, where in practice they
overlap.

[//]: # Don't understand this bit, taken it out for now: This was a step in the right direction, as the model represents weaving via the shed operation rather than a cellular matrix, it brings it closer to a continuous form.
 
# Tablet weaving simulation

Tablet weaving (also known as card weaving) is an ancient form of
textile pattern production, using cards which are rotated to provide
different sheds between warp threads. This technique produces long
strips of fabric, which in antiquity were used as starting bands,
forming the borders of a larger warp weighted weaving.

Tablet weaving is extremely complex, so in a similar manner to the 4
shaft loom, we devised a language/notation to help better understand
it. As before, this language can be used either to drive a computer
simulation, or can be followed when weaving. The following shows the
output of a simple program written in this language, consisting of
the single-instruction procedure `(weave-forward 16)`.

\begin{center}
\mbox{
\includegraphics[width=0.5\textwidth]{figures/06-forward16.png}
}
\end{center}

The language consists of such simple instructions to represent the
movement of the cards to create each shed. The previous example shows
a simple case where cards are moved a quarter-turn to create each of
16 sheds. The card rotations are shown on the left for each of 8
cards, the simulated weaving is on the right for the top and bottom of
the fabric. The `(weave-forward 16)` instruction repeats the operation
of moving all the cards a quarter turn and adding a weft, a total of
16 times.

In our simulation, the cards are set up with a double face weave on
square cards, with threads coloured (clockwise from the top right
corner) black, black, white, white. We can offset the rotation of
these cards from each other first, to change the pattern. The
`rotate-forward` instruction turns only the specified cards a quarter
turn forward without weaving a weft, illustrated in the following code
and simulated output:

\begin{center}
\begin{minipage}[c]{0.25\linewidth}
\includegraphics[width=1\textwidth]{figures/07-diagonal.png}
\end{minipage}
\hspace{0.5cm}
\begin{minipage}[c]{0.60\linewidth}
\lstset{language=Lisp}
\lstinputlisting{code/diagonal.scm}
\end{minipage}
\end{center}

One aspect of tablet weaving not included in our simulation is that it
is not physically possible to weave such high numbers of forward
rotations without completely twisting up the warp. In practice, we
need to balance forwards and backwards movements to make something
physically weavable. However if we do so, then a 'zig zag' pattern
results, as the below demonstrates.

\begin{center}
\begin{minipage}[c]{0.25\linewidth}
\includegraphics[width=1\textwidth]{figures/08-zigzag1.png}
\end{minipage}
\hspace{0.5cm}
\begin{minipage}[c]{0.60\linewidth}
\lstset{language=Lisp}
\lstinputlisting{code/zigzag.scm}
\end{minipage}
\end{center}

The following shows that a different starting pattern better matches the
stitch direction.

\begin{center}
\begin{minipage}[c]{0.25\linewidth}
\includegraphics[width=1\textwidth]{figures/09-zigzag2.png}
\end{minipage}
\hspace{0.5cm}
\begin{minipage}[c]{0.60\linewidth}
\lstset{language=Lisp}
\lstinputlisting{code/zigzag2.scm}
\end{minipage}
\end{center}

Another way of forming patterns is by *twisting* the cards. The
`twist` command takes a list of cards to twist, and results in these
cards reversing their turn direction compared to the others. With
double faced weave, the twist needs to take place when the cards are
in the right rotation, otherwise we get an 'error', such as that shown
below:

\begin{center}
\begin{minipage}[c]{0.25\linewidth}
\includegraphics[width=1\textwidth]{figures/10-mip.png}
\end{minipage}
\hspace{0.5cm}
\begin{minipage}[c]{0.60\linewidth}
\lstset{language=Lisp}
\lstinputlisting{code/mip.scm}
\end{minipage}
\end{center}

If we put our encoded twists into repeating loops, we can make small
programs with complex results. You can see a comparison between the
simulated and woven form below, the latter created by following the
program by hand.
	  
\begin{center}
\begin{minipage}[c]{0.5\linewidth}
\includegraphics[width=1\textwidth]{figures/12-twistpat-comb.jpg}
\end{minipage}
\hspace{0.5cm}
\begin{minipage}[c]{0.35\linewidth}
\lstset{language=Lisp}
\lstinputlisting{code/twistpat-comb.scm}
\end{minipage}
\end{center}

This tablet weaving language was the first we created that describes
the actions and movements of the weaver. It was mainly of use in
understanding the complexities of tablet weaving, however some of this
still remains a mystery -- the calculation of the inverse side of the
weaving is not correct, probably due to the double twining of the
weave. In some cases it has very different results, in others it
matches perfectly. Further experimentation is needed.

This language also began our investigations into combining tablet and
warp weighted weaving techniques into a single notation system. This
remains an ongoing challenge, but pointed in the direction of a more
general approach being required - rather than either a loom or
weaver-centric view.

# Flotsam Raspberry Pi Simulation

Since antiquity, weaving has been a fundamentally *digital*
technology, as it involves combinations of discrete elements or
threads. For this reason we place it in the same category as modern
digital technology which involves combinations of discrete voltages --
computers, smartphones and so on. When we do this we see many
differences between the design of these tools, how we interact with
them, and their relationship to our bodies. One of the important
strands of research on our project turned out to be looking for how
the design of weaving tools, having been honed over very many
generations and across many cultures -- can inform the design of
programming tools and help us with some of their limitations.

*Flotsam* is a prototype, screen-less tangible programming language
largely built from driftwood. We constructed it in order to experiment
with new types of "tangible hardware", for teaching children
programming, without the need for a traditional keyboard-and-screen,
single user interface. It is based on the same L-system as was used
for the first mathematickal arts workshop (see \S
\ref{sec:plainweave}), and describes weave structure and patterns
using wooden blocks representing yarn width and colour. The L-system
rules for the warp/weft yarn sequences are constructed from the
positions the blocks are plugged into, using a custom hardware
interface.

\begin{figure}
\begin{center}
\subfloat[\label{flotsam}Interface designed for teaching children programming.]{
\includegraphics[width=0.4\textwidth]{figures/12-flotsam.jpg}
}
\hspace{0.5em}
\subfloat[\label{star}A woven pattern created with Flotsam, exhibiting different threads qualities described using the physical blocks.]{
\includegraphics[width=0.4\textwidth]{figures/13-star.png}
}
\end{center}
\caption{The Flotsam prototype}
\end{figure}

The weaving simulation runs on a Raspberry Pi computer, and the
overall system is designed to describe weave patterns which include
yarn properties beyond colour, which are therefore beyond the
capability of Jacquard looms. The version shown in Figure
\ref{flotsam} is restricted to plain weave, but more complex
structures can be created as Figure \ref{star} demonstrates. The
flotsam tangible hardware was used in primary schools and tutoring
with children, and was designed so the blocks could be used in many
different ways -- for example, experiments beyond weaving included an
interface with the popular *Minecraft* computer game and a music
synthesiser.


As before, the L-system programming approach provided quick
exploration of the huge variety of weaving patterns, although this
approach perhaps distracts from one of our core goals - to understand
and communicate how weavers think. The physical design of the system
itself needed further development, as the plugs were tricky to
position correctly - particularly for small fingers. However, during
use we related strongly to the findings of @Horn2009, in that the
tangible interface appeared to encourage collaborative learning beyond
that possible with a traditional keyboard and screen interface
designed for a single user.

Another possibility with this kind of physical interface is the
increased role of *touch* -- we wrapped the tokens with the kinds of
yarn that they represented (and the 'replication' tokens in tinfoil),
as a way to allow people to *feel* the symbolic representation rather
than needing to see it, increasing the range of senses in use during
programming as well as making the system much easier to explain.

\begin{figure}
\begin{center}
\includegraphics[width=0.6\textwidth]{figures/14-flotsam-wrapping.jpg}
\caption{Profile of the Flotsam prototype, with tactile blocks in situ.}
\end{center}
\end{figure}
# Pattern matrix warp weighted loom simulation

One of the main objectives of our project was to provide a simulation
of the warp weighted loom to use in demonstrations, in order to
explore and share ancient weaving techniques. Beyond our previous
simulations we needed to show the actual weaving process, rather than
the end result, in order to explain how the structures and patterns
emerge. Weaving is very much a 3-dimensional process, and our previous
visualisations failed to show this well.

\begin{figure}
\begin{center}
\subfloat[Sketch by Ellen Harlizius-Klück while explaining the warp weighted loom (left) and resulting simulation (right).]{\includegraphics[width=0.5\textwidth]{figures/15-twin.jpg}}
\hspace{0.5em}
\subfloat[The \emph{pattern matrix} design.]{\includegraphics[width=0.4\textwidth]{figures/16-pm1.jpg}}
\end{center}
\caption{Design sketches that lead to the \emph{Pattern Matrix}}
\end{figure}

We built a 3D simulation of a warp weighted loom which ran on a
Raspberry Pi computer, which allows for easy integration with our
experimental hardware.


Following our experience with the Flotsam prototype, we decided to
explore tangible programming further. The pattern matrix was the next
step, specialised for weaving and built by Makernow (Oliver Hatfield,
Andrew Smith, Justin Marshall; <http://www.makernow.co.uk/>) and FoAM
Kernow. The pattern matrix was initially designed for use in Miners
Court, an extra care housing scheme in Redruth, Cornwall alongside
other crafts and technology workshops as part of the Future Thinking
for Social Living (<http://ft4sl.tumblr.com/>) project with Falmouth
University. This interface was developed further in a public setting,
during a project residency at Museum für Abgüsse Klassischer Bildwerke
(Museum of Casts of Classical Sculpture) in Munich.

A technical challenge for the pattern matrix was to remove the need
for physical plugs, which proved problematic with the Flotsam
prototype. The affordability of the programming blocks themselves was
also an important constraint, partly due to the need for use in public
places. We therefore designed the blocks as disks, painted white and
black on opposing sides, and without physical connections. Instead, we
embedded magnets within them so that the orientation and position
of the disks could be picked up by a grid of sensors in the base of
the pattern matrix, via the *hall effect*. The hall effect sensors
detect the polarity of nearby magnetic fields, and even with fairly
weak magnets we found we could put the sensors right next to each
other and still determine the difference between two opposed or
aligned fields.

For the warp/weft weave pattern structure, we only need a single 'bit'
value to be detected per block, where on / off corresponds to over or
under. However for other features, such as yarn colour selection, we
needed to be able to represent more information, so allowed for four
bits to be encoded through the magnet alignments. Accordingly, we used
four hall effect sensors in a square, allowing us to detect rotation
and flipping of the blocks. At this point, we noticed that this has
parallels with tablet weaving -- both in terms of the notation, and
the flipping and rotation actions required to use the device. We found
that we can represent all sixteen possible states with only four
blocks -- if negative is `0` and positive is `1`, and we read the code
as binary numbers, clockwise from top left. The following shows the
four different magnet configurations we used in the blocks, how they
change their states with twisting and flipping, and the decimal
numbers these states represent:-

Starting state - decimal values: 0,1,5,6

    - -   + -   + -   - +
    - -   - -   - +   - +

Rotate clockwise - decimal values: 0,2,10,12

    - -   - +   - +   - - 
    - -   - -   + -   + +

Horizontal flip - decimal values: 15,11,10,12

    + +   + +   - +   - - 
    + +   + -   + -   + +

Rotate counter-clockwise - decimal values: 15,13,5,6

    + +   + -   + -   - + 
    + +   + +   - +   - +

Vertical flip - decimal values: 0,4,5,6

    - -   - -   + -   - + 
    - -   - +   - +   - +

\begin{figure}
\begin{center}
\includegraphics[width=0.5\textwidth]{figures/17-DSC_1064.jpg}
\caption{A member of staff at Miners Court extra care housing scheme trying the first working version of the tangible weavecoding. The Raspberry Pi displays the weave structure on the simulated warp weighted loom, with a single colour for each warp and weft thread.}
\end{center}
\end{figure}

The 3D warp weighted loom simulation was our first to include selvedge
calculation, as well as animating the shed lift and weft thread
movement. The inclusion of the selvedge, along with multiple weft
threads for the colour patterns, meant that the possibilities for the
selvedge structure was very high. We don't yet have a way to notate
these possibilities, but at least we could finally visualise this, and
the simulation could be used to explain complexities in this ancient
weaving technique.

# Representing thread

A central puzzle to our project is how to represent woven thread,
using code. In the following we will share examples written using the
Haskell programming language, which supports careful thinking of
structure, in terms of the *types* of data in a language. Many readers
will not be familiar with this programming language, but we include
them to at least share a trace of our thinking around the structure of
woven threads.

A naive approach to representing a weave would be as a two-dimensional
grid or raster, for example as a list of lists of boolean values,
representing ups and downs:

````
data Weave = Weave {draft :: [[Bool]]}
````

This allows the woven structure within a weaver's draft to be
represented, and fits programming language affordances very well,
which are well suited to the processing of lists. But this provides a
very particular point of view, which does not consider the path of a
thread, including at the selvedge. Our question then was, what happens
if we attempt to find a representation which takes the point of view of a
thread, rather than a weaver?

The below lists just some of the different ways we thought about
representing a weave. Each represents a different point of view or way
of thinking, in terms of movement of thread, loom and weaver. They do
not represent a program to execute, but merely different opposing ways
in which a computer could represent a thread and its weave.

````
-- Thread properties as a list
type Thread a = [a]

-- Thread properties as behaviour over its length
type Thread a = Int -> a

-- Construction of a weave as change of state
type Pick = Weave -> Weave

-- Construction of a weave as a sequence of movements (like a turtle)
data Move = Over | Under | TurnLeft | TurnRight
type Weave = [Move]

-- Weave as path - coordinate based
data Weave = Weave {thread :: [(Int,Int,Bool)]}

-- Structure of weft relative to state
data Change = Up | Down | Toggle | Same Int | Different Int
data Weave = Weave [Change]
tabby = Weave (Up:repeat Toggle)

-- Lift plan
data Pull = Up | Down
data HeddleRod = HeddleRod [Pull]
data Weave = Weave [[HeddleRod]]

-- Unweave
data Untangle = Pull | Unloop
data Unweave = [Untangle]

-- Discrete thread
data Direction = Left | Right
data Thread = Straight | Turn Direction | Loop Direction | Over | Under

-- Weave as action
data Direction = Left90 | Right90 | Left180 | Right180
data Action = Pull Int | Turn Direction | Over | Under
````

Through this process, the representation that we found ourselves most
drawn to was that which focussed on the actions of a thread:

````
data Action = Over | Under | Pull Int | TurnIn | TurnOut
type Weave = [Action]
````

The first two actions represent a thread going *over* and *under*
another thread (which may be itself, in the case where it has turned
back upon itself). The third represents a thread being *pulled* a
discrete number of measures, or in other words, a thread being under
tension, over a distance. We felt this important, as tension is an key
part of the structure of a weave, at least while it is on the loom.

The final actions are of the thread turning an assumed 90 degrees,
either *in* or *out*. In practice, *in* means turn in the same
direction as the previous turn, and *out* in the opposite direction. A
more obvious approach would be to explicitly represent left and right
turns, but this does not make sense from the perspective of a
thread. The structure of a thread is of twisted fibres, with little
purchase on a left/right orientation, which only makes sense from the
perspective of the weave, not the thread. This thread-centric concept
of *in* and *out* operates relative to the previous turn, rather than
the weave as a whole.

Happily, the concept of *in* and *out* fits well with the
back-and-forth movements of woven thread, particularly a weft
thread. Rather than thinking in terms of turning left on one side, and
right on the other, we can think of both turns in terms of the thread
first turning *out* from the weave, and then back *in* to turn back on
itself on the next row. Accordingly the creation of a warp of `n`
threads of `l` length can be represented as a repeating cycle of just
three steps:

````
warp n l = take (n*3) $ cycle [Pull l,TurnOut,TurnIn]
````

Similarly, we can represent a plain or tabby weave with a single
thread, by composing together a warp, with a turn inward, and a
repeating over/under:

````
tabby h w = warp h w ++ [TurnIn]
                     ++ threadWeftBy (rot 1) ([Over,Under]) h w
````

Following this weave produces the following structure, again rendered with text, where `#` represents over and `+` under.

~~~~
 .-    .--.  .--.  .--.  .--. 
 `--#--+--#--+--#--+--#--+--#--.
 .--+--#--+--#--+--#--+--#--+--'
 `--#--+--#--+--#--+--#--+--#--.
 .--+--#--+--#--+--#--+--#--+--'
 `--#--+--#--+--#--+--#--+--#--.
 .--+--#--+--#--+--#--+--#--+--'
 `--#--+--#--+--#--+--#--+--#--.
 .--+--#--+--#--+--#--+--#--+--'
 `--#--+--#--+--#--+--#--+--#--.
    `--'  `--'  `--'  `--'  `--'
~~~~

An advantage of this approach is that it is able to represent a case
where lengths of weft threads are pulled and put under tension, in
order to become a warp for a later stage of the weave. This is of
particular interest to our project, in relation to the ancient method
of starting with a tablet woven band, with an extended weft which
later becomes the warp. The following composition demonstrates such a
proof of concept, where a the weft of a four-twill later becomes the
warp of a tabby pattern.

````
[TurnOut,TurnIn,TurnOut,Pull 8, TurnIn,Pull 1] ++ warp 8 9 ++ [TurnIn]
 ++ (weftToWarp 6 $
     threadWeftBy'' Odd (rot 1) [Over,Over,Under,Under] 8 9
    )
 ++ [TurnOut,TurnIn,TurnIn]
 ++ threadWeftBy'' Odd (rot 1) [Over,Under] 10 6
````

~~~~
       .--------------------------.
    `--'        .--.  .--.  .--.  |  .--.  .--.  .--.  .--. 
             .--+--#--+--#--+--#--+--+--#--#--+--+--#--#--' 
             `--#--+--#--+--#--+--#--+--+--#--#--+--+--#--. 
             .--+--#--+--#--+--#--#--#--+--+--#--#--+--+--' 
             `--#--+--#--+--#--+--+--#--#--+--+--#--#--+--. 
             .--+--#--+--#--+--#--+--+--#--#--+--+--#--#--' 
             `--#--+--#--+--#--+--#--+--+--#--#--+--+--#--. 
             .--+--#--+--#--+--#--#--#--+--+--#--#--+--+--' 
             `--#--+--#--+--#--+--+--#--#--+--+--#--#--+--. 
             .--+--#--+--#--+--#--+--+--#--#--+--+--#--#--' 
             `--#--+--#--+--#--+--. -'  `--'  `--'  `--'
             `--'  `--'  `--'  `--'
~~~~

# Conclusion
 
The investigations reported above represent a kind of self-driven
'crash course' on weaving for computer programmers. At the beginning,
weaving seems straightforward and almost mundane, but there is great
interest, and as the phrase goes, a whole range of devils in the
details. Each of the approaches we have taken to understanding weaves
through modelling have been necessarily limited, but is clear that any
attempt to create a monolithic simulation of physical woven structure
is doomed to failure. In some ways, it is what each of our simulations
and representations misses out that makes them interesting.

Our overall feeling is that textile culture has much to offer computer
science and software engineering, having grappled with issues of
overlapping and layered notation systems, and their relationship to
physical constraints, for thousands of years. In a sense looms were
the first computing machinery, and as a practice, programming has
similarly inherited a position in society regarded primarily
utilitarian and hidden from view.

If we compare the tools and designs which have evolved over millennia
in weaving to those used in software engineering, we see that software
construction as it is practised by the vast majority of programmers
only makes use of a very narrow set of senses [@Victor14]. We feel
that this disconnection from the physical and social substrates within
which code runs right through to the vulnerability we experience daily
in areas of privacy, robustness and security. Perhaps if we look in
the right places, textile culture can provide us with new ways to
answer to some of these issues.

# Funding

This work was supported by the Arts and Humanities Research Council,
under Grant AH/M002403/1.

# Biographies

David Griffiths is a game designer, programmer and livecoding
algoraver based in Cornwall UK. In 2014 he co-founded FoAM Kernow, an
independent research institution for exploring uncharted regions of
art, technology and science with Amber Griffiths. In 2014 FoAM Kernow
was awarded the Soil Association innovation award for the "Farm Crap
App" and in 2016 David appeared on the Cerys Matthews Radio 6 Music
show talking about Sonic Kayaks - turning paddlers into citizen
scientists to help climate change research using music. Since 2013 he
has lectured as associate professor of critical programming at the
Robert Schumann School of Music and Media in Düsseldorf, and alongside
Aymeric Mansoux and Marloes de Valk he created the satirical Facebook
game Naked on Pluto which won the Telefonica Vida competition in
2011. David also teaches primary school children, teenagers and school
teachers programming, Minecraft and electronics, and previously he
worked in the games (Computer Artworks & Sony Europe) and film
computer graphics industry (Moving Picture Company), and has credits
on feature films including Troy and Kingdom of Heaven.

Alex McLean is a live coding musician, digital artist and
interdisciplinary researcher based in Sheffield, UK. He completed his
PhD thesis "Artist-Programmers and Programming Languages for the Arts"
in 2011 in Goldsmiths, University of London, leading into a research
fellowship at the School of Music, University of Leeds, during which
time he worked on a number of research projects including leading the
Weaving Codes, Coding Weaves project with Ellen-Harlizius Klück. He is
now beginning work on the ERC PENELOPE project as a Post-Doctoral
researcher at the Deutsches Museum Research Institute.

Alex is active across the digital arts, including co-founding the
TOPLAP and Algorave live coding and algorithmic music movements, the
international conferences on Live Interfaces (ICLI) and Live Coding
(ICLC), the Sonic Pattern symposia, the Festival of Algorithmic and
Mechanical Movement (with FoAM Kernow), and the Dorkbot electronic art
meetings in Sheffield and London. He is a director of the Access Space
charity, working in the area of education and the arts in
Sheffield. Alex also created the TidalCycles live coding environment,
now a popular free/open source project used by people across the world
to make strange music.

http://slab.org/

# Bibliography
